MUSIC
At the moment we are in a state
of universal interception.
I took an oath and swore to
defend the constitution,
I did not take an oath to
defend the NSA.
Edward Snowden did something
that was important
and it was a heroic act.
To call these people
superheroes is not so good,
because it sets them up.
For some people they
are superheroes,
for others simply traitors:
Whistleblowers like Daniel
Ellsberg, Thomas Drake
William Binney and
Edward Snowden.
Hackers and activists like the
WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange
and the former British secret
service agent Annie Machon.
They warn us about the complete
surveillance of our society.
They oppose
intelligence agencies,
governments and corporations.
And for this they
are threatened,
hounded and imprisoned.
Why are they so committed,
what drives them?
MUSIC
San Francisco, California –
the cradle of our modern day
computer industry, home
to creative technicians
and visionaries, hackers
and whistleblowers...
In a suburb of San Francisco
lives the Godfather
of all whistleblowers:
Daniel Ellsberg.
I’m probably the only whistle
blower, that I know of,
who can make a living
as a lecturer
because I’m the one who was
put on trial for 115 years
I’m the one who was involved in
a president being... resigning
because of his
crimes against me.
So he made me notorious enough
that I can make a
living as a lecturer.
Ellsberg studied economic
science at Harvard
in the 1950's. After
graduating he enrolled,
like many fellow whistleblowers,
in the military
And you see courage
there all around you
of the conventional
sort, high courage.
You’ve been trained for it,
you’ve been disciplined for it
but you see it, it happens
if the training works.
And people are
risking their bodies
and their lives every minute.
At the end of the
1960's Ellsberg
worked at the US
embassy in Vietnam.
He became known by publishing
the secret Pentagon papers,
which proved the US president
had lied to the American public
about the Vietnam
War for years.
Ellsberg decided to make
the documents public.
after meeting peace activists,
who had refused the draft.
I would not have
thought of doing it,
if didn’t have the example
of many, many people
who were going to prison
for nonviolent
resistance to the craft.
In 1969 Ellsberg began
smuggling parts
of the “Pentagon Papers” out
of the government agency
he worked for and copied them
over the following months.
A total of 7,000 pages
of secret documents.
In March 1971 he passed the
documents to the New York Times,
who eventually printed them.
Ellsberg surrendered himself
and was charged with theft
and unauthorized possession
of Pentagon material.
The trial collapsed
when it came to light
that Nixon had illegally
wire-tapped Ellsberg
and agents had broken into
his psychiatrist's office.
Ellsberg thereafter
remained a free man.
If they arrest me or indict me,
then I will say it was only me.
Patricia, who was standing
next to me, did cooperate,
it so happens, and she...
I couldn’t figure out why
she wasn’t indicted, my
wife, because she had done
a lot of copying, had her
fingerprints all over the paper
and the reason I thought it was,
was because they didn’t want
such a beautiful woman
sitting next to me
at the defense table
in front of the jury.
I would advise people now
not to do what I did,
to reveal themselves,
if they can avoid it.
I revealed myself for the same
reason Snowden did, essentially.
We knew, that other people
would be suspected,
maybe even charged,
with circumstantial
evidence against them.
People who might look
more guilty than you did.
MUSIC
In a way, I would rather
take the risks of democracy,
than the risks of dictatorship.
Mr. Daniel Ellsberg
CLAPPING AND CHEERING
We have a third panelist who’ll
be joining us, from Russia,
one of my real heroes and
I think for many people
in this room, many people
of the hacker community,
many people in America -
Edward Snowden, welcome!
CLAPPING AND CHEERING
More than 40 years
after Daniel Ellsberg,
NSA employee Edward Snowden
emerges as a whistleblower.
The USA now has a new
public enemy number 1.
Thanks to Manning
and now to you,
I am getting more favorable
publicity than in 40 years.
Because suddenly people who were
all for putting me in prison
for life before,
now realize that
I was really a very good guy.
I was the good whistle-blower
And so, I totally of
course rejected this
from the beginning, I
didn’t want to be a foil
for showing up badly two
people that I totally admire.
There was a moment at HOPE
X, the HOPE X conference
in July in New York City.
Ellsburg was having a live
conversation with Snowden.
We have a right as
Americans, and as members
of the global community,
to know the broad outlines
of government policies that
have a significant impact
on our lives and I think
that’s something,
that Tom Drake showed me how
to do it the right way.
MUSIC
There was a moment when
he said very clearly
very distinctly that I
showed him the right way.
I had always hoped that a
Snowden would come along.
Thomas Drake served during
the “Cold War” in Europe
in the 1980's with the
US Air Force
which included work as a
signals analyst on spy planes,
hoovering the Soviet Union.
So my day job is reconnaissance
of another country
and then my hobby
was computers.
And it was a fascinating world
and you are now communicating
with people, particularly
in Europe, very quickly.
You have these bulletin
boards and I’m dialing
into your Chaos Computer Club.
Yeah, I was a virtual member.
In the 1990's Drake worked as a
software developer for the CIA.
In September 2001 he was hired
as a senior analyst by the NSA.
My first day in the job was
9/11, we were working,
you know, 16-18 hour days.
I mean it was...
Those four months after 9/11 are
a blur. Because it was just..
We recognized, that this was a
significant event in history.
MUSIC
Whatever you’ve got in the
fight, whatever you’ve got
got in the labs, we need it.
Whatever tools you can use
to prosecute those
behind 9/11, do it!
I was selected as the designated
senior executive NSA,
to lead up that effort, to find
anything we had in the fight.
And so I did.
And that’s where I brought
to the attention of others
tools, techniques, programs,
things that are in the lab,
things that were pilots, things
that are being just test bed.
The mantra, that went out
from NSA by general Hayden,
he kept going around, saying,
we just need to make Americans
feel safe again. Feel safe.
Even add banners.
And I discovered during those
first couple of three weeks
after 9/11, all of
this information,
that as you can imagine,
was pouring in after 9/11,
literally being used to monitor
and surveill and intercept
US domestic communications
on an extraordinarily
broad scale.
I was finding this out
within days of 9/11
and others were coming to me
saying what are we doing Tom?
Among the Snowden
documents were figures
for the US secret
service budget.
Since September 11th they
supposedly doubled
from 25 billion to 52
billion US Dollars in 2013.
The surveillance programs
continued to metastasize.
They continued to
expand in ways
that still have not
been fully revealed.
And this became sort of the
collect-it-all
mindset mentality.
What does that lead to? Well,
yes, your securitization,
you have these other interesting
arrangements with certain
internet providers and
telecommunication concerns.
So the temptations are
enormous and its like hey,
give us access and
hack in or open it up
and that’s what happened, I mean
and now you’re seeing
a lot of this unfold.
The National Security
Agency, NSA for short,
the largest foreign
intelligence agency in the USA,
has been responsible for
the worldwide monitoring
of electronic
communication since 1952.
Some of the 35,000 employees
weren't comfortable
with the massive expansion of
surveillance since September 11.
All of the colleagues
that I knew,
which was just a handful,
Bill Binney,
Ed Loomis, Kirk Wiebe,
chose to retire from the
NSA in late October 2001.
They realized what
was happening,
they could not stand by
and see the subversion of the
constitution and all the work
that they had done being
used for mass surveillance.
They left the agency, I
begged them to stay.
I chose to remain and fight from
within, as long as I could.
I got mad at them. And so my
objective was to counterattack.
I don’t believe in
defense, you know?
Just sitting back and
being defensive.
I mean, you have to get
out there and attack.
So that’s what I started doing.
That was my point.
It’s time to attack.
So basically it was a
declaration of war.
Me against my government.
William Binney, mathematician
and programmer,
initially worked for the
NSA as an analyst,
then later as the technical
director of the secret service.
As the boss of a 6,000
strong team he developed
developed a wire-tap programme
that anonymously filtered
and processed large
volumes of data.
I tried to do the right
thing, right after 9/11,
trying to make a contribution
that would make a difference.
They refused to accept it,
so I was basically blocked.
There was nothing I could do,
they would accept
nothing from me.
The NSA directors decided
against the programme
from Binney's team and
opted for another
that collected much more data.
MUSIC
The problem is, I helped
in designing
the system that’s in use.
Because I knew what was
possible once they started
using those programs and opening
it up to massive data input
on everybody on the planet,
so it was pretty clear,
it was obvious to me
how they were using it
and what they were doing
with it, so... I mean
because I understood the
design of the systems.
And so after that, when they
started spying on US-citizens
and violating the
constitution I had to leave.
I couldn’t be a part of
all the criminal activity
that was going on. I mean,
that’s fundamentally...
I call that treason
against the country.
So I got out at the end of
October, Halloween day 2001.
One year later Binney
submitted a complaint
to the US Defence Department
for wasting state funds.
The complaint was examined
but had no effect.
The patriot Bill Binney became
a combative whistleblower -
a role model for many today.
MUSIC
The Sam Adams Associates for
Integrity in Intelligence
presents it’s Integrity Award
for 2015 to William Binney.
Bill Binney represents the
patriotic side of a duel
duel between two
unequal adversaries.
Like Tom Drake and Ed Snowden
he was determined to preserve
his integrity, his privacy
and his personal honor.
CLAPPING
This is your Sam Adams
Associates Integrity
in Intelligence
Award recipient.
So thank you, Bill!
CLAPPING
I knew every major leader in
NSA, I know general Hayden
personally and I have to say
that I had met more people
with true integrity and
character since I left NSA.
LAUGHTER
While Binney opted
out of the system,
his colleague Thomas Drake
fought against the violation
of democratic civil rights
from within the NSA.
I knew from the moment I stood
up to my own supervisor
and I went to her and
said: What are we doing?
Violating the prime directive.
You can not spy on Americans
without a warrant. You
don’t understand.
I confronted my boss, I go to
the office and the council,
I confront him.
And then he says:
Don’t ask any more questions.
Now you’re faced with a dilemma.
I didn’t give the order,
I’m not the one, that was
implementing the surveillance...
the mass surveillance program,
the digital drag net.
What do you do? I chose
to blow the whistle.
MUSIC
But how do you do that?
Knowing there is a mass
surveillance program and knowing
that NSA was targeting,
“targeting” journalists.
MUSIC
I made arrangements,
in encrypted form,
to communicate anonymously
with this reporter.
MUSIC
Then I made a decision, that
I would meet the reporter.
That was in February of 2007.
The journalist subsequently
published a number of articles
about the waste and
mismanagement in the NSA.
The repercussions were
enormous but the NSA
let the attacks
come to nothing,
as Drake did not prove
the central part
of his criticism
with documents.
This tactic suddenly
stopped working in 2013.
Edward Snowden's material,
though it’s stuffy,
made it absolutely
impossible for them to deny
what they were doing because its
simply laid out in their terms
on their slides, what
they were doing.
And it was impossible
for them to deny it.
I don’t think Mr
Snowden was a patriot.
The way in which these
disclosures happened
have been damaging
to the United States
and damaging to our
Intelligence capabilities.
People ask, as I see it,
is he patriot or traitor?
You know, that’s the headline
in all these things.
“Edward Snowden: Patriot or
Traitor?” That drives me nuts.
The very thought, you know,
that people could regard
you as a traitor.
What we will likely face
is the cost in human lives
on tomorrow's battlefield
or in some place
where we will put
our military forces
when we asked them
to go into harms way
and I think that’s the
greatest cost that we face
with the disclosures that
have been presented so far.
Snowden was the one
person in the fucking NSA
who did what he absolutely
should have done.
How many people should
have done what you did?
CLAPPING AND CHEERING
What Snowden is revealing
is the global threat
to potential for
democracy anywhere.
Being a patriot doesn’t
mean, you know,
obedience to authority.
Putting aside your obligations
to your people, to your country,
for the benefit of
your government
is the opposite of patriotism.
Until the revelations by
Edward Snowden,
the warnings of
intelligence agency critics
were always shrugged
off as speculation.
Only after he had published all
the original NSA documents
was there a proof and
concrete evidence
provided for the first time.
MUSIC
Documents make all
the difference.
It is more risky to do
that, it also makes
all the difference in terms
of political effect.
Snowden, Manning and I
gave the documents.
Less than one percent of
the Snowden documents
have been published.
And that’s terrible.
It’s a terrible thing.
Those documents do not
belong to a journalist,
they do not belong
to Edward Snowden.
They do not belong to the
National Security Agency.
They belong to history.
They are a part of something
that humanity has gone through.
Every single one
of us have been...
has been a victim of National
Security Agencies spying.
All human beings who use the
internet are victims of it
and the victims deserve to know
what has happened to them.
MUSIC
I think the opportunity is
in producing a very broad
global outrage about what has
happened in every country
and informing all the victims
of that surveillance
about what has actually
happened to them.
And releasing enough
documents so that all
the technical
industries, hackers
and computer programmers
and all the governments can work
out how to protect themselves.
Julian Assange, hacker
and journalist,
was interested in computer
programming from an early age.
As a teenager he
had already hacked
into foreign data systems
and military networks.
Later he studied physics and
mathematics in Melbourne.
In 2006 he founded
the whistleblowing
website WikiLeaks,
which publishes secret
documents of governments,
intelligence agencies
and corporations.
Daniel Ellsberg was an insider
and Edward Snowden
was an insider.
I would say, that I
was never an Insider.
I was inside Military and
Intelligence in big companies
as a computer hacker and
later as an analyst
analyzing their material,
so I had a keen sense,
for what their were about
but I never had the view
that one should work for
those organizations.
For people who were in the
US-National Security System
it was like they
were on a drug.
A drug, that made
them powerful,
because they were in a group
that had a lot of power.
And that system has a way
of talking about how
the world works and how
the United States Empire
is a good thing and it
can take a long time
to wash that drug
out of the system.
Daniel Ellsberg has
nearly entirely
washed that out of his system,
but the more recent
whistle-blowers,
they still have perhaps
some way to go.
The only difference I have
from Assange is I think,
the only difference is, I think,
that he probably believes
more in the value
of total or near total
transparency, than I do.
On WikiLeaks, highly explosive
documents can still be published
anonymously that otherwise
would be withheld
through non-disclosure
or censorship.
According to WikiLeaks
all documents
are checked for authenticity.
One major aim is to
force corporations
and intelligence agencies
agencies to abide
to more transparency and
social responsibility.
To shed light on their
well kept secrets,
which cover up illegal
and immoral behaviour.
That is just this
rhetorical counter attack,
which is like something
out of kindergarten.
Which is to say: No,
no you do that.
And unfortunately the
US press is so...
sort of servile that it
reprints this nonsense.
So WikiLeaks reveals
very concretely
with extremely
accurate documentation
how the US’s own records
show that it was involved
in one way or another in
the deaths of more than
120 000 people in
Irak and Afghanistan
between 2004 and 2010.
And the US governments
response is,
maybe hypothetically as a result
of the release of this material
some Afghan family or US
soldier could face risks.
That’s the standard accusation.
Or like what Tom Drake did
threatened military lives,
well exposing corruption,
fraud, waste and abuse
doesn’t threaten
military lives,
continuing them threatens
military lives.
Now the end result is that they
were forced to admit last year,
under oath, not a single
person had been harmed
as a result of that publication.
Not one.
MUSIC
Assange demands the protection
of individual privacy
on the one hand and on the
other radical transparency
of governments and
corporations.
But what are the motives
of whistleblowers?
Why do intelligent insiders
step forward into the light,
risking their
careers, their lives,
to expose the wrongdoings
of those in power?
Is there a common aim,
a collective mission
of this broad alliance and
wild mix of patriotic
ex-secret service agents,
anarchic hackers,
cyberpunks and
intellectual publicists?
The common theme among all
of us is that we support
human rights and
that we support
the public’s right
to know information
especially when it
threatens the public
or threatens the democracy or
the freedom of individuals.
I mean, that’s the
kind of common theme
that goes through
all of it, I think.
But it’s a lonely act, that
you commit as one person.
But I was convicted by the
truth of what I knew.
So I made a conscious choice,
to yes, violate a 'non
disclosure' agreement.
We also took the oath to protect
and defend the constitution
against all enemies,
foreign and domestic.
So that means even
our government,
if its violating
the constitution,
so we have the responsibility
to stand up against that.
It’s the moral agency.
You’re confronted by activity
that demands a response.
And you’re in a place, where you
have access to information,
you have access,
you’re eye-witness.
You’re essentially
eye witness
or you’re brought
into awareness.
To call these people
superheroes is not so good,
because it sets them up
on a pedestal, to say
"Well, they did it, I admire
that, but they are not me."
" I am not a superhero."
Who thinks of themselves
as a superhero?
Only nuts, you know, or 16 year
olds dream of it, you know.
So that’s your excuse
for not doing it.
It doesn’t take a superhero.
And none of these people would
have been identified
as superheroes.
MUSIC
Is democracy possible
with the executive branch
in each country, whether its
nominally democratic or not,
knowing everything about
the private lives
of all of their citizens, their
legislators, their journalists,
their judges and their
ordinary people,
who can be turned
into informants.
With those people knowing almost
nothing about the government.
The government being
opaque and secretive
and the people
being transparent.
You guys, this is the most
ridiculous shit I’ve ever seen,
you know, you’re spying on
everybody in the country,
and everybody in the world.
You’re not even bothering to
get a court order for it —
a real court order, instead
of your secret court order.
If you don’t have privacy
in your communications,
if you can't guarantee,
that you can hold a
telephone conversation
or write an email or view stuff
from the internet or read books,
once that is known
to the authorities
you begin to self-censor what
you say and what you read.
Annie Machon is a former agent
of the British national
intelligence agency MI5.
You begin to withdraw a little
bit from your normal life
because you are told
you can't mention
you’re being recruited by MI5.
And that means that
people tend to focus
much more on their
life within MI5.
So you begin to socialize a lot
more with other people there.
Because you can
talk about stuff.
And also you end up
mainly in relationships
with your fellow
intelligence officers.
Which is how I met
my former partner
and colleague David Shayler.
When Shayler made the
illegal practices
of the intelligence
service public,
Annie Machon supported him
in becoming a whistleblower.
In 1997, shortly
before the publication
of the secret documents,
the couple flew to France.
They went underground
for a year
and subsequently lived
in Paris for two years.
In 2000 they
returned to London.
Shayler went to prison.
Machon was spared.
Since then she fights for
government accountability
and campaigns for the
rights of whistleblowers.
When David Shayler and I ended
up and going on the run
after we had blown the whistle
on a series of crimes from MI5,
we were very conscious
of exactly how they
could be targeting us
and investigating us.
So wherever we were,
we thought, well,
the telephone might
be compromised,
the computer might
there might be microphones
in where we were living,
there might be little video
cameras, recording what we did
and also people might be
turned to report against us.
So there are all these different
techniques they can use.
And this was way back in the
nineties – the Analogue era.
So even at that point when
we were on the run from MI5
across Europe we used
the only sure fire way
that we knew to communicate
to each other securely.
Which was to put a piece of
glass or ceramic on a surface
and put one sheet
of paper on it.
And then you cover it,
so that nothing can read
what you are writing
on the paper.
You don’t say anything, you
just write what you want
on the piece of paper.
And then you allow the other
person to read that message.
So there is no audio,
there can be no video
and there can be no imprint
under that one piece of paper.
Then of course you have to get
rid of that piece of paper
so you have to burn it
up, pulverize the ashes
and either cast it to the winds
or tip the ashes down the loo.
Because we know that our
computers, our telephones,
all of that can be compromised.
The video can be
switched on remotely;
the audio can be
switched on remotely.
They can log what we
write on the keyboards.
They can even – and this comes
from the Snowden disclosures –
they can even use micro
waves apparently to beam
onto the screen and read
what you are typing.
MUSIC
We live in a digital world
where little remains unseen,
turning privacy into
another luxury good.
MUSIC
Bleak science-fiction
visions of a powerful
surveillance apparatus
with seemingly endless
technical possibilities now
only seems a question of time.
How does this change our
behaviour if every move we make,
every word we say is
recorded and analyzed?
Which roles will
we have to play?
And who is writing the script?
Having lived with that sense
of endemic surveillance
I can tell you its corrosive
to the human spirit.
So once you loose
that sense of privacy
and you start to self-censor,
you stop to be an effective
and fully integrated citizen
of that country
so privacy in my view
is the last defense
against the slide towards a
police state or totalitarianism.
If you let go your
rights for a moment,
you have lost them
for a lifetime.
And that’s why this matters:
It’s because it happened and
we didn’t know about it.
We weren’t told about it.
MUSIC
So if you say, you
have nothing to hide,
so you have nothing to worry
about, you have nothing to fear.
You’ll hear all that language.
Okay, fine…
do you live in an
apartment or house?
Yes. Well, just
give me your keys!
Do you have a car or
rent it, you've got a car
you'd rather rent
it or lease it, yes?
Give me your car-keys!
Do you use Google, do you
have a gmail account?
Do you have Facebook? Well,
give me all your passwords.
Do you have medical records?
Turn them over to me too.
Oh by the way, all those bank
accounts and telephone records,
yeah just give them to
me for safekeeping!
Can you have
independent courts,
can you have an independent
press? None of that.
NSA now has the potential
to know every source
of every journalist
of every story.
By following the emails,
following the phones,
following the people with their
GPS, with their iphones.
Mass surveilling in general is
not about surveilling you,
It's not about surveilling me.
It's about surveilling
us, collectively.
It's about watching the company
for everybody in the country
and on a global scale.
MUSIC
In harsh contrast to the
recently emerged facts,
great public outcry has
not yet been heard.
MUSIC
Now, why don’t people care?
In the UK it’s a very easy
answer. Partly it's cultural
because we're still in
love with James Bond
and our political leaders
immediately came out
in defense of the Intelligence
Agencies, saying:
“We know what they do.
They follow the law.
Everyone get back to sleep.
Don’t worry.”
So the debate has been
very muted in the UK.
It wasn’t, I think, as I said
in USA, Brazil and Germany,
but it’s amazing how
quickly people forget.
MUSIC
When it became known
in autumn 2013
that even the private cell
phone of German chancellor
Angela Merkel was
tapped by the NSA,
the public outcry in Germany
was initially large.
Until then, the German-American
friendship had been close
and Germany believed
to be an equal partner
of the United States.
Do friends spy on friends?
Of course they do!
Everybody does.
I mean we caught the Isrealis
spying on us several times,
what did that do to
our relationship?
Not really anything, because we
know everybody does that, okay?
If you are a leader of a country
in the world, you are a target.
Everybody wants to know,
what you’re thinking.
So you are a target.
Friends and foes, right,
everybody's looking to see
or trying to find out
what you’re thinking.
Universally true. I mean,
that's why diplomacy
was started, right?
Back in thousands of years ago.
So I mean it’s nothing new.
Chancellor Merkel, when she
found out her private phone
was being tapped, I mean
she should have understood
that from the beginning I mean
and her security should have
told that from the beginning
and given her some protection.
Since all the leaders understood
it, the fact that it’s exposed,
you have to object
maybe publicly,
but in reality afterward the
relationship is too important
to jeopardize just
for a simple thing,
that you already
knew was happening.
MUSIC
The problem in relation
to bulk surveillance
is exactly the same as the
problem with global warming.
Exactly the same.
It's not that it will affect
you right now, individually.
Why is global warming
interested in you?
Why is the NSA
Global warming effects
everyone
because it’s a general
change in things.
Bulk surveillance affects
everyone because it leads to
a general change in the
nature of civilization.
Global warming is invisible.
It’s intangible.
You only kind of glimpse:
Maybe today was a bit hotter.
I don’t know, is this
coincidence or not?
Similarly massive
surveillance is invisible.
It’s conducted at these points
that connect continents together
or by the NSA sticking
its fangs into Google.
And these are extremely
sophisticated
and complex technologies
that everyone except specialists
does not understand.
Specialists understand it
and say to everyone else:
"My god can't you see
what's happening?"
Similarly in relation
to greenhouse gases,
climate scientists
understand it, say:
"My god, can't you see
what's happening?"
In the case of climate
science, well,
there is a counter lobby which
is the fossil fuel companies
and all those
profiting from that.
In the case of
bulk surveillance
there is the
surveillance industry
and intelligence
agencies and so on
And all those who
are sucking down
this information and
profit from it
and form a lobby in the other
direction. So very similar.
The fear of terrorist attacks
makes the mass surveillance
a necessary evil for many.
The much quoted “If you
have nothing to hide
you have nothing to fear”
often legitimizes the
snooping of covert agencies.
Yet many are unaware
of the actual extent
of the surveillance.
MUSIC
This is basically a
big data program,
which provides the raw data
that can then be analyzed,
it can be filtered, it can
be subjected to rules,
for example, like
X-Keyscore, that says:
Everything you do
is being analyzed,
it’s being weighted,
it’s being measured.
MUSIC
But the intelligence
services are not
the only ones monitoring
communications
and processing massive data.
Also private corporations
like Google,
Amazon, Facebook and Apple
collect millions of pieces
of information about us,
to analyze and monetize.
MUSIC
We don’t really
know, what exactly
happens with our own
digital trails.
Our data is transferred
invisibly to huge data centers,
sublimating into
complex new identity,
creating our digital self.
MUSIC
Everyone gets smarter
because of this technology.
Because its free or
very inexpensive.
And the empowerment of people
is the secret to
technological progress.
We are all participating in
this enormous transition,
where billions of people
are joining our party,
joining our fun and
joining our anxiety.
New developments in the
machine intelligence
will make us far far
smarter as a result.
And this means everyone
on the planet.
The genetics
revolution has a huge
and positive impact on the
way we will treat disease
progression of disease
and forth and so on.
Its all basically because
these smart phones
are really supercomputers.
MUSIC
With the advent of
the smart phone,
we have become
even more visible.
MUSIC
So I would always
call this a spy phone.
And it’s not just iPhones
that are spy phones,
I mean most smart phones
are these days.
Smart phones capture our
communication behaviour,
how long, when, where
and with whom we talk,
apps collect data about our user
behaviour, even our health data.
In addition, many people use
digital data storage like clouds
carelessly handing over
their information.
All of our communications are
being intercepted, collected,
analyzed and stored
automatically,
and that means that all of our
ideas, all of our thoughts,
all of our expressions, our
associations, who we talk to
who we meet, who
we love, who we hate.
As the old internet saying
goes: “if it is for free –
then you are the product”.
Because the use of all those
convenient digital
online services are only
seemingly for free, because
we pay with our data.
MUSIC
We have neither an
insight nor overview
about our digital
self and absolutely
no possibility to
actively control it.
MUSIC
The data we create,
assembling our digital self
is also of interest as a
juicy source of information
for the intelligence community.
So equipment is now being,
put... placed on US networks,
infrastructure,
electronic infrastructure,
tapping straight in. Enabled
by critical partnerships,
the full extent of which have
still not being revealed
to this day, not even from
the Snowden disclosures,
AT&T, Verizon and a
number of others.
But that's where it started.
It was with the "phone
companies", ok.
It was rapidly expanded
to include emails
and all related
information, internet usage
and all related information
and financial transactions.
The revelations
by Edward Snowden
provide detailed insights
into the relationships
between intelligence services
and private companies.
Telephone metadata and
web browsing histories
are of great interests to
the intelligence community.
MUSIC
See, that’s really
industrial relations.
They were tapping
the fiber lines
between the Google
servers, yeah.
They didn’t even know this was
going on. Google did not, okay.
So I mean, that’s the point.
They can tap lines
anywhere in the world.
And when they do that,
they can get it
between the servers
of any company.
From my perspective, I think
there has been massive collusion
between the big internet
corporations and big government,
you know, the big spy agencies,
the military security complex.
They have agreements between
them where they will pay money
for data if they
produce data for NSA,
or they will also pay for access
and like for example the room
in the AT&T facility in San
Francisco that has the NSA
its the NSA room
that has the tap
and all now they feed data in
and it’s really AT&T that
has to maintain that room.
Facebook is evil, in my view,
I’ve been saying this for years.
It is the spy's wet dream.
We offer up our information and
it’s just there on a plate
for the spies to access.
And we know they do
through back doors and things.
And yet, that sort of
information used to take them
weeks or months to
gather on an individual.
The extent of information
that Google has is nothing
near what the NSA does.
For example they do not have...
they have the access to the
emails if they are using gmail
for example, but not all the
other service providers.
So they don’t have that
data to do a composite view
of what people are doing,
nor do they have access
to all the fiber optic
lines around the world,
nor do they see the
banking transactions
or the financial transactions
or the phone calls,
they don’t see that so there's
a vast amount of information
that Google does not have.
MUSIC
So that's something that
is leading to increasing
concentrations of power and
you get some smart people
with these companies
and then these connect
to the National Security
sector as contractors.
So the creative vibrancy
in market capitalism,
is what I am concerned about.
Many of the companies
concerned reacted immediately
to the Snowden revelations.
They proclaim and advertise
seemingly tap-proof
mobile phones, and
texting services.
Followed by public
denouncements, pleading,
that they will no longer
put up with the pressure
of the intelligence services.
MUSIC
The way in which the technology
companies have reacted
in the wake of the Snowden
Leaks means that the level
of cooperation between
technology companies
and intelligence
agencies has gone down
and that's added to the
threat in some ways.
MUSIC
It would be slightly bizarre, if
all the advances in technology
and the use of bulk data
analysis, which are improving
the performance of business,
improving the health care
delivery and so on, somehow
national security weren’t
allowed to use it.
MUSIC
It’s not as if the
more security you get,
the less privacy you have, or
the more privacy you have,
the less security you have.
In a free society like
we enjoy in the west,
your freedoms are
guaranteed by security.
And so the job of western
governments is to find
the optimum levels of
privacy and security
so both are maximized.
As a consequence of the
September 11th attacks,
the technical capabilities
of the intelligence services
were massively expanded.
International collaboration
of national spy organizations
was also intensified -
not always without
friction and problems.
They do have the similar aims,
like combating
international terrorism,
but yet they listen
in on one another.
After when 9/11 hit, there
was this perspective
that Germany had screwed up.
That the security
services had screwed up.
That they had harbored
terrorists. Right.
You have the cells in
Hamburg, you have a number
of the hijackers, that
transited through, live there,
plan there, it was a significant
cell, there’s no question
about that and there is a
whole history behind it.
I think, as I said
this even publicly,
I've said this in terms
of the testimony
before the Bundestag, that
Germany within Europe
was declared target number one.
And I believe, I believe,
significant pressure,
but clearly out of the secret
partnership in cooperation
with the BND and
others, was expanded
and we know that now, again
more evidence has come out,
there is a special agreement,
the secret in expendance of
Shahriar Arraignment.
It basically gave the
United States carte Blanche
but also it was "Hey BND, now
you're not only going
to cooperate, you’re going
to help facilitate."
In the spring 2015 a
scandal erupts in Germany
Germany regarding the close
and secret collaboration
between the German intelligence
service BND and the NSA.
MUSIC
The BND cooperated with the NSA
to spy on European politicians
and assisted the
United States
in attempts of
industrial espionage.
When the press reported
that the Chancellery
had known about the
scandals since 2008,
it peaked with the German
opposition threatening
to sue the own government
over BND-NSA affair.
MUSIC
Since 2014 an inquiry into
the Snowden revelations
meets in the Bundestag.
For the first time a
whistleblower from the USA
reports to the parliamentary
committee about the NSA
and its inter-relations
with the German BND.
MUSIC
William Binney confirmed the
very close relationship
between the BND and the
NSA to the commission.
A relationship that
already existed
during his time in the
US intelligence service.
MUSIC
From what I can see, they
had the same problem
getting
information from the BND
that the congress has of getting
information from the NSA.
That is, they either won’t tell
them, or they lie to them.
One or the other.
I mean, that's what's been going
on in the US government.
The point is, in our
case, we've been...
the Snowden material
has made it obvious
that they've been lying
to the government.
That's what Intelligence
Agencies are.
They are tasked to do things
in secret that are unlawful.
Or politically embarrassing.
See, the intelligence
agencies aren't controllable
unless they’re really
heavily monitored
and there is a verification,
an unquestionable
verification process.
They don’t have that now. That’s
the problem in our country, too.
We do not have an unequivocal
verification process
that the agencies
can’t corrupt.
I mean all governments
seem to be in a position
of having to trust their
intelligence agencies
telling them the truth.
And that is questionable.
Nothing will happen in terms
of any self-regulation.
These organizations are too
secretive, too complex
and too well connected
to the powers
that are meant to
regulate them.
SIREN
The German Chancellery
and the Bundestag parliamentary
control committee
are officially responsible
for the control of the BND.
Only with a more comprehensive
and effective control
of the intelligence agencies
can civil rights and privacy
be properly protected.
What other options are
there to prevent abuse
or possible illegal
activities by the spies?
MUSIC
Often only intelligence
insiders are left to go public,
reveal institutional violations
and become whistleblowers.
Yet there is a disparity
between these individuals
on the one side and
the governments
and intelligence
services on the other.
And so the whistleblowers
and activists soon find out
what happens when they challenge
theses organizations.
MUSIC
After his revelations
in 2013, Edward Snowden
tried to flee from Hong Kong
to South America via Moscow.
But the US revoked
his passport.
He couldn't continue his
journey from Moscow
and had to apply for
asylum in Russia.
Snowden had been criticized
about ending up in Russia.
He ended up in Russia,
because the state department
canceled his passport.
And so he couldn’t
fly out of Russia.
I mean it is an
incredible own goal.
Why would they do that?
That allows them to
make the argument
that he’s working for Russia.
And they can apply
the 1917 act.
Why would they want to
apply the 1917 act?
Because the 1917 act carries
with it the death penalty.
And they want to give
him the death penalty.
The NSA commission
in the Bundestag
actually wanted to call
Snowden as a witness.
Many voices in the German
public support the idea
to grant Edward Snowden
asylum in Germany.
MUSIC
WikiLeaks is now an organization
that is in conflict
with the FBI, the CIA, the
National Security Agency
and the GCHQ etc.
An organization that is well
known to these agencies
and an organization that
they want to wrong foot.
How the USA wanted to stop
Julian Assange came to light
in 2011 as part of the
so-called STRATFOR hacks.
MUSIC
STRATFOR is a Texas based
consulting company,
developing Geo-strategical
strategies
for the US government.
Jeremy Hammond, the
hacker, who copied
a total of 5 million emails
from the Stratfor server,
was sentenced to 10 years
prison at the end of 2013
MUSIC
Hammond's data theft included
controversial messages
by the vice-president of
Stratfor to the US government.
They contained a multi-stage
strategy proposal
of how to deal with Assange.
Two weeks after the
hacker attack,
the accusations of rape
surfaced in Sweden.
Assange travelled to Sweden in
2010 for a series of lectures.
There, investigation proceedings
into sexual misdemeanors
against two Swedish
women were opened.
Assange said he was being
subjected to a smear campaign
and refuted the allegations.
When Interpol issued an
arrest warrant for him,
he went underground.
Within twenty four hours
it had been dropped,
it had been accessed by the
most senior prosecutor
in Stockholm, Eva
Finné, and dropped.
And she said that there
was no crime. At all.
That had been committed.
So later on it came out
in the Supreme Court here
that both women concerned
had not further complained.
And that one of them had said,
that the police
had made this up.
After a brief game
of hide-and-seek,
Assange handed himself
in to the London police
in December 2010 and was
remanded in custody.
Released on bail, but with
an electronic ankle monitor,
Assange fought in court against
his extradition to Sweden
on a number of occasions.
The walls were closing in
both from the US side,
the US was clearly ready,
and from the Swedish
side and from the UK.
At the time in June 2012, I
had a lot of surveillance,
and also GCHQ, as later
came out, was spying on us
and the National Security
Agency on me personally.
So there was a risk when
coming to the embassy
to apply for asylum
that action would be seen and
that I would be interdicted.
But I was extremely
well disguised.
I didn't look anything
like I normally look.
But is it true that... I mean
I heard something of a wig
and a stone in the shoe.
Is that true?
The stone in the shoe
is correct, yes.
And the wig and the clothing?
Everything was different.
The reason you put a
stone in your shoe
is to change your gait,
because the gait
can be quite recognizable
and that's not an issue
if someone is just seeing
you in the newspaper,
but it is an issue for
a surveillance team.
Since June 2012 Assange
has been stranded
at the Ecuadorian
embassy in London.
At that time I said: "Well,
I'd be happy to go to Sweden,
provided there's a guarantee
of no extradition
to the United States.
Because the London Independent
had already revealed
that the US and Sweden
were in informal talks
about extraditing
me from Sweden.
He’d be rendered, yeah. We call
that rendering. You know,
that's one of the
dark side activities
that we've been doing.
Taking people out the street
anywhere in the world
and sending them to
different places
for torture or
imprisonment or whatever.
MUSIC
Once the story is over,
the journalists skip off
and break new stories,
they’ve made their careers
and the whistleblowers left
high and dry, having broken
their careers with no hope
of proper employment again.
Having left behind your whole
way of life, your social circle,
everything. And in the case of
Intelligence whistleblowers
you face automatic prosecution
and conviction, too.
So it's a very
high price to pay.
Well I mean the real
threat came when the FBI
came into my house and when I
was getting out of the shower
and pointed a pistol at me.
So I was getting out of the
shower, getting dried off
and they came in,
pointing a pistol at me.
And also my family.
So it was threatening, it was
how they're threatening people.
And then after that the
Department of Justice
attempted to fabricate
evidence and indict us.
I was very publicly indicted
with a ten felony count
indictment under the espionage
act facing 35 years in prison.
That was the final price.
You've got to
remember that inside
the intelligence community
they’re trumpeting these things,
they are holding these guys
up as examples to say look,
if you say what's going on,
if you step out of line,
even if you’re doing it
for the right reasons,
even if you’re doing
it the right way,
there will be repercussions.
They talk about internal
channels and what not,
but these guys used
internal channels,
and people like Thomas Drake,
they ended up getting indicted.
And this is something that I
paid very close attention to
and I learned a
great deal from.
It was very rare in
American history
to get charged with espionage
for non spy activities.
In fact I was actually only
the second whistleblower
charged in like manner. The
first was Daniel Ellsberg.
When he went to
the Baltimore Sun
he did not reveal
classified information.
Now, they charged him with
classified, but that was a hoax,
see that was a fraud. They
reclassified material
that they found in his computer,
which was not classified.
and he had every
reason to believe
that he would not be prosecuted
for what he gave
to Baltimore Sun.
He would lose his job, he would
lose  his clearance right,
this is very serious, his
jobs depended on clearance.
In fact most of the
jobs he should have
now would require clearance.
So he was taking
a very serious risk.
But I doubt if he thought he
would be prosecuted. I doubt it.
I was black listed. I
was persona non grata.
I was radioactive. No
government agency would take me
nor any contractor with the
government. It was off limits.
And NSA made it crystal clear
even though there were attempts
even prior to my
indictment to find work.
It had all come to naught.
So I ended up as a wage
rate employee at Apple,
one of their retail stores
in the greater D.C. area,
where I still work.
Unable to find any other
work at all of any kind.
That was the price.
You have no job.
You have no career.
You have no pension.
All those years I served
in the government,
I am now a traitor and
an enemy of the state.
The price Thomas
Drake and other whistleblowers
pay for warning against the
danger of a surveillance state
is high. Loss of
friends and family.
Flight into exile or
long prison sentences,
under more stringent
conditions.
Professional isolation and
personal financial collapse.
MUSIC
It’s so similar! It’s so
weird, it so mirrors the…
you become very efficient,
everything is organized,
everything is...
It's just like...wow.
How far we go in our
efficiency,
erase the sovereignty
of individuals?
I see how far an
institution will go
to erase freedom for
a person's life.
And the only way they can
do that is to control them.
Every single second of the day
and measure it at the same time.
Wow.
I chose to put myself
inside that system.
Never imagining what I did.
That I’d be charged
with espionage,
for having defended
the constitution,
protecting the constitution
became a state crime.
Ok?
A state crime.
And we have the power.
You don't.
In the end, all they had left
to do was assassinate me.
At the character level
that's all they had left.
Assassinate me.
Which is the ultimate
form of control.
Right.
It doesn’t matter what even the
crimes against the state were.
You’re unacceptable.
You’re not fit
to work in the government
or be a citizen.
Yeah, you do deserve prison.
Because you’re the wrong kind.
Where have we had
that in history?
MUSIC
Well then, let's go upside.
You just described how the
FBI team interrogated me.
In a similar room.
And they played the good
cop, bad cop with themselves
and they brought the
chief prosecutor in.
He threatened me with
spending the rest of my life
in prison unless I cooperated
with their investigation.
And he said: "You
better start talking."
And I simply said:
"I’m not gonna
plea bargain with the truth."
He says: We have more than
enough evidence to put
you away for a long, long time.
I was declared an
enemy of the state.
I committed crimes
against the state.
But I’m standing here free and
I can't begin to tell you
you what it means,
because I’m okay, right.
So I’m thanking you for
holding up the mirror
to my own government, okay?
Right, because I’m free.
I did not end up in the
dark hole, okay, alright.
I’m glad the West
won in that regard
and yet how paradoxical it is,
that the technology of the west
is now being used to mass
surveillance on a scale
the Stasi never could
have imagined.
I don’t need one agent to 180,
quote on quote,
East German citizens.
The computer takes
care of it for me.
That’s the real machine.
That makes it a lot easier too.
I publicly call for the
dissolution of NSA.
You can't reform it, there
is no reform possible.
The last thing left, which
is true, is to cut funding.
The problem is they
weren’t smart enough
to understand what
they were creating.
What they in fact were creating
was a master stasi network,
I mean this is like
the Stasi on super steroids.
The Stasi had all this
data on a lot of people
but it was all hand written
on paper in files,
so very difficult to
manipulate also hard
to keep up to date,
hard to keep complete.
None of that is a
problem anymore,
especially with this electronic
acquisition and information
that makes it really simple
so I referred to this
as the Stasi on super steroids
and NSA I now refer to
as the new Stasi agency.
Time after time after time mass
surveillance has come up wanting
It has been unable to prevent
some of the most
significant terrorists,
well these terrorist
incidents of our day.
It never prevented the
Boston Marathon bombing.
It certainly didn't prevent
the latest Charlie Hebdo
massacre in Paris.
Why is that?
I call these things
data bulk failures.
Simply because, when
you have X-keyscore
and you send your people in
to look at all this bulk data,
they're just inundated
with information,
they can’t get through it.
MUSIC
With the next big
evolutionary step,
we will face the expansion
of the so-called Internet
of things: watches, fridges
but also our clothing
will be equipped with
Internet connections
to produce ever-increasing and
evermore precise data about us.
Through automation,
artificial intelligence
and ever perfected algorithms,
machines will soon be
able to predict our behaviour.
But what happens to a society,
that is consciously aware
of being permanently
observed, where every step,
every action leaves a trail?
Our lives in a surveillance
society will be reduced
to simmering in a
convenience hell:
conformist behaviour,
self-censorship
and mere consumerism, labelled
as freedom of choice.
The only guarantee
we can have our own privacy,
our own security,
is to take it in our own hands.
We can’t trust the corporations,
we cannot trust our governments
and we certainly cannot trust
the spy agencies to respect our
privacy, and respect the law.
So that’s the reason
to be hopeful.
Small organization,
very committed people,
when even faced by a giant
intelligence bureaucracy
like the National
Security Agency,
like the CIA in an
earlier case,
the Pentagon, the DoJ
state department etc.,
can survive and even thrive.
Ok.
Get a bloody nose doing
it, but still stand up.
I’m not telling you what to do.
I’m not telling you what
to believe in. You know.
And it’s okay if you hate me.
It’s okay if you
disagree with me.
It’s okay for
everybody, you know,
to look at this because
we have to decide
how we feel, right?
We’ve got to stop
thinking that what’s
on the news is the
gospel truth.
That what an official
says behind the podium
is exactly the right answer.
Or, what I say is something
that should be relied on. I
could be totally full of shit.
You’ve got to figure
out what you believe in
and stand for it. You
have to stand for it.
you know, and whether I’m a good
guy, whether I’m a bad guy,
whether I’m a hero,
whether I’m a traitor,
none of that matters.
Criticize me. Hate me.
But think about what matters
in the issues. Right?
Think about the world
you want to live in
and then be a part
of building that.
MUSIC